Source: LiteraryMachinesChapter2-nelson.pdf
================================================================================


--- Page 2 ---

LITERARY 
THE REPORT ON, AND OF, PROJECT XANADU 
CONCERNING 
WORD PROCESSING, 
ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING, 
HYPERTEXT, THINKERTOYS, 
TOMORROW'S INTELLECTUAL REVOLUTION, 
AND CERTAIN OTHER TOPICS 
INCLUDING 
KNOWLEDGE, EDUCATION AND FREEDOM. 
by Ted Nelson 

--- Page 3 ---

THIRD EDITION. This volume incorporates changes 
made by the Xanadu working group for the second 
edition, particularly the back-end specfications 
as described in the final chapter. 
Anyone wishing to interface to the system should 
contact the Xanadu working group at 313/663-3637, 
as the details described in that chapter are not 
yet locked. 
Additional copies of this book may be had by 
sending a valid check for fifteen dollars to 
Ted Nelson, Box 128, Swarthmore PA 19081. 
No purchase orders or deferred-payment plans 
can be accepted. 
A number of trade and service marks, especially 
the word "Xanadu" and the Eternal-Flaming-X 
symbol, are claimed for the products and 
services described in this book. See Chapter 
Four, "Trademarks." 
(s) 1981 Theodor Holm Nelson 

--- Page 4 ---

CHAPTER TWO 
PROPOSAL FOR A UNIVERSAL ELECTRONIC 
PUBLISHING SYSTEM AND ARCHIVE 
2.1 AN ELECTRONIC LITERARY SYSTEM 
2.2 WHAT IS LITERATURE'? 
2.3 A TRUE STORAGE SYSTEM FOR TEXT AND OTHER EVOLVING STRUCTURES 
2.4 A LINKING SYSTEM FOR TEXT ANO OTHER DATA 
2.5 THE DOCUMENT CONVENTION 
2.6 COMPOUND DOCUMENTS 
2. 1 ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING 
MAKING THE LITERARY SYSTEM UNIVERSAL 
2.8 DISTRIBUTION AND NETWORKING 
2.9 VITAL ISSUES 

--- Page 6 ---

CHAPTER 2 
PROPOSAL FOR 
A UNIVERSAL ELECTRONIC 
PUBLISHING SYSTEM AND ARCHIVE 
LITERARY We azee aZ.Z. agreed that your theoPy is arazy. 
The question whiah divides us is whether it is 
arazy enough to have a ahance of being aorreat. 
My ObJ1Z feeZ.ing is that it is not crazy enough. 
Niels Bohr 
quoted in Kenneth Brower, 
~ Starship and ~ Canoe, 46 
2fi MACHINES 

--- Page 7 ---

PLAN OF THIS CHAPTER 
This chapter is in nine sections, which introduce and elaborate on a very particular and precise design and plan. This chapter, design and plan are the heart of this book, a crossroad through which you are asked to pass repeatedly. 
Some readers, especially those who may not have given these matters any thought, may find this material tough sledding the first time through. Therefore a summary level has been provided. (The bigger type. ) Stick to that the first time through, or if you're in a hurry later on to pass to another Chapter Three. 
If this chapter is long and tedious to read, that is only because it strives for completeness. I am sure that a few years from now everything in it will be quickly divined by sma.ll chi-ldren sitting at a console which enacts these principles. 
LITERARY t/i MACHINES 

--- Page 8 ---

AN ELECTRONIC LITERARY SYSTEM 
Here is the right way to do something by computer: ~irst figure out 
what you really want to do and think about, instead of staying bog­
ged down in what you usually do and think about when you don't use 
a computer. 
What will be described here is 
the way we think information should be 
handled. In the later sections of the 
chapter we will be describing the de­
tailed idea of it, the conceptual 
structure'"or virtuality. This chap­
ter is only about this idea, without 
technicalities. (The few "computer 
technicalities" a.re in footnotes.) 
We also believe that we have car­
ried out this design in a practical 
form, and that it will shortly exist as a functioning computer program with 
many uses. This belief will be proven 
or disproven in the fullness of time. 
Meanwhile, what is really being des­
cribed is what we think we have crea­
ted. Believing that this is the right 
virtuali ty, it is what we have imple­
mented. 
The footnotes contain a few kib­
itzing remarks to those interested in 
how we have done it.* 
• The Project Yanadu g:c,up baa != -tilM baen developing software to do vb.at is described 
hare vitb. no cmiplic:ation• tor the~. OUr way of seeing the world,•• de•c:ri.bad here, is 
rellected 1A any •Y• 1A our 1muaua.i data structure. 
(continued at bottom of next page) 
LITERARY MACHINES 

--- Page 9 ---

For instance, we are going to look at ways of dealing with text 
based on its "true" structure, if we can figure out what that is. 
THE DESIGN 
It is difficult to describe an 
interactive computer system so people 
can visualize it. 1-k)st people have 
not had practice in visualizing jump­
ing and responding objects on the bas­
is of abstract descriptions. 
When we say also that we think 
this design is simple and basic, like 
the telephone, that may be hard for 
some readers to believe, considering 
that it takes so many 'Nerds to des­
cribe it. Yet we think this design, 
once understood, is spare, parsimon­
ious and clear. (And that a few years 
from now, small children will under­
stand it immediately when they get a 
chance to play with it.) 
(continued from previous footnote) The structure of documents and 
links to be described here is, for a 
computer system, unusually su.,ple. 
This is all there is: we will describe 
it completely. We regard the simpli­
city of this design as its greatest 
virtue. The user has no direct con­
tact with technicalities. The techni­
calities undemeath are simply the 
means whereby certain exact and simple 
services are rapidly performed. 
THE INTRINSIC STRUCTURE 
IS WHAT YOU SHOULD SEE 
The structure a user sees should 
be the intrinsic structure of his ma­
terial, and not (as in many "word pro­
cessing" systems) some amalgam combin­
ing the material itself with sane set 
'?0 da efficiently vbat will be daac:rtbed hen. we hav. had to owrtbrov All conventions and 
conventional uaumpt.ian• &bcNt data handling and indaxing, buildinq froa Che bott:cm up a syst .. 
t.ba.t we thinJc can grow indatinit.aly without c.'lclting on retrieval and tranmaisaion bottlenedcs. 
iM belieff w ha,,. &ehiav.d this in our uniqua proprieea.ry sott,,an. 
We could only carry out thi• daaign with th• help ot certun t:ecbnical developments ·.mien 
a.re !or the preMnt proprietary And secnt. A number of radical diacoffries int.he field of. 
ccmputar indexinq and ntrieval r.ndar it poaaibl• to offer !:!lase services within seconds on 
~ic;urati011• ot pnNDt-day equipmnt, e"Nn, we believe, a11 the number ot documents and ser­
vice requeau •ll;landa to utz'IXM::aic:al figuna. See "The Only Way It Could ;Jork," Chapter 4. 
LITERARY 2/1 MACHINES 

--- Page 10 ---

And we are going to create a service that simply stores and sends 
back different excerpts from this "true" structure of text. 
of obtrusive conventions under which 
it is stored. 
What the thing is--its natural 
structure to the user--is what he 
should see and work on: nothing less, 
nothing more, nothing else. It is 
therefore the representation of this 
structure-- of whatever structure the 
user may be concerned with--that 
should concern us. However, the com­
plexities of what may be wanted can 
be staggering. So the problem is to 
create a general representation and 
storage system that will permit auto­
matic storage of all structures a 
user might want to work on, and the 
faithful accounting of theiJ: develop­
ment. 
WORLD AND VIEWPANE: 
BACK AND FRONT ENDS 
While computer display screens 
are to be the foci of our coming so­
ciety, what the world is that will 
show on the screens is perhaps of 
greater concern. 
The question in computerizing any­
thing, then, should be ~ is the 
true structure? Having answered that, 
LITERARY you design a system that stores and 
shows that true structure. 
Storage is fundamental. What you 
store should be the basic structure of 
the information you are dealing with-­
not some tricky arrangement that is 
carefully matched to some set of pro­
grams or hardware. (How you will look 
at this world when it is spreadeagled 
on your screen is your own business: 
you control it by your choice of 
screen hardware, by your choice ov 
viewing program, by what you do as you 
watch. But the structure of that 
world is the same from screen to 
screen.) 
What we will discuss here is rep­
resentation of the true structure of a 
certain kind of information, not how 
to show it. We believe that an order­
ly overall system can be developed for 
most types of written and graphical 
information and its instantaneous de­
livery. 
That is the storage system we 
will be discussing here. Think of it 
as a "back-end" service that can sup­
ply your system. At the screen of 
your computer you explore what is 
MACHINES 

--- Page 11 ---

stored, change it, add to it. The ser­
vice we propose takes care of putting 
it away and sending you whatever part 
you ask for as fast as possible. That 
is the back end. What computer you 
watch it through, and how that machine 
is programmed, is your "fr~end'-- a 
separate problem. 
This is a VIRTUALITY. One of the 
principles of designing virtuality is 
that there are many possible overall 
organizations that may be very similar. 
The problem of choosing among them is 
not simple. The tricky words that 
follow, "true structure," suggest ut­
ter uniqueness. But this is not the 
LITERARY only "true" design. It is the design 
suggested by the one working precedent 
that we know of: literature. 
Whether it is a good and right 
design is the central question for the 
reader to judge. What we describe can 
be done: if not by us, then by some­
body sometime. But if it is not the 
right system, then it is on the read­
er's shoulders to come up with a bet­
ter one. 
Suggestons are welcome-- if you 
are sure you understand this design 
first (including Balance I. See 
"Tuning the System," a Chapter 3.) 
MACHINES 

--- Page 12 ---

2.2 WHAT IS LITERATURE? 
Literature is an ongoing system of interconnecting documents. 
THE LITERARY PARADIGM 
A piece of writing-- say, ~ sheet 
of typed paper on the table-- looks a­
lone and independent. This is quite 
misleading. Solitary it may be, but 
it is probably also part of a litera­
ture. 
By "a literature" we do not mean 
anything necessarily to do with belles­
lettres or leather-bound books. We 
mean it in the same broad sense of 
"the scientific literature," or that 
graduate-school question, "Have you 
looked at the literature?" 
A literature is ~ system of in­
terconnected writings. We do not of­
fer this as our definition, but as a 
discovered fact. And almost all wri­
ting is part of some literature. 
The way people write is based in 
large part on these interconnections. A person reads an article. He 
says to himself, "Where have I seen 
something like that before? Oh, yes 
--" and the previous connection is 
brought mentally into play. 
Consider how it works in science . 
A genetic theorist, say, reads current 
writings in the journals. These refer 
back, explicitly, to other writings; 
if he chooses to question the sources, 
or review their meaning, he is follow­
ing links as he gets the books and 
journals and refers to them. He may 
correspond with colleagues, mentioning 
LITERARY Z/1 MACHINES 

--- Page 13 ---

in his letters what he has read, and 
receiving replies suggesting that he 
read other things. (Again, the let­
ters are implicitly connected to these 
other writings by implicit links.) 
Seeking to refresh his ideas, he goes 
back to Darwin, and also derives in­
spiration from other things he reads-­
the Bible, science fiction. These are 
linked to his work in his mind. 
In his own writing he quotes and 
cites the things he has read. (Again, 
explicit links are being made. ) Other 
readers, taking interest in his sour­
ces, read them (following the links). 
In our Westem cultural tradition, 
writings in principle remain continu­
ously available-- both as recently 
quoted, and in their original inviola­
ble incamations-- in a great proces­
sion. 
So far we have stressed some of 
the processes of referral and linkage . 
But also of great importan ce are con­
troversy and disagreement and reeval­
uation. 
Everyone agrues over the inter­
pretation of former writings, even our 
geneticists. One author will cite (or 
link to) a passage in Darwin to prove 
Darwin thought one thing, anohter will 
find another passage to try to prove 
he thought another. And views of a field, and the way 
a field's own past is viewed within it, 
change. A formerly forgotten resear­
cher may come to light (liJ:ce Mendel), 
or a highly respected researcher may 
be discredited (Cyril Burt) • And so 
it goes, on and on. The past is con­
tinually changing --or at least seems 
to be, as we view it. 
There is no predicting the use 
future people will make of what is 
written. Any sranmary, any particular 
view, is exactly that: the perspective 
of a particular individual (or school 
of thought) at a particular time. We 
cannot know how things will be seen in 
the future. We can assume there will 
never be a final and definitive view 
of anything. 
And yet this system functions. 
LITERATURE IS DEBUGGED. 
In other words, even though in 
every field there is an ever-changing 
flux of emphasis and perspective and 
distortion, and an ever-changing fash­
ion in content and approach, the on­
going mechanism of written and pub­
lished text fumishes a flexible ve­
hicle for this change, continually ad­
apting. Linkage structure between 
documents forms a flux of invisible 
threads and rubber bands that hold the 
thoughts together. 
LITERARY 1/8 MACHINES 

--- Page 14 ---

Linkage structure and its rami­
fications are surprisingly similar in 
the world of business. 
A business letter will say, "In 
reply to your letter of the 13th ••• " 
Or a business form, another key coDDDu­
nication, may say in effect, "In res­
ponse to your order of the 24th of 
last month, \\18 can supply only half of 
what you have asked for, but can fill 
the rest of the order with such-and­
such item from our catalog." All of 
these citations may be thought of as 
cross-linkages among documents. 
The point is clear, whether in 
science or business or belles lettres. 
Within bodies of writing, everywhere, 
there are linkages \\18 tend not to see. 
The individual document, at hand, is 
what \\18 deal with; \\18 do not see the 
total linked collection of them all at 
once. But they are there, the docu­
ments not present as \\1811 as those 
that are, and the grand cat's-cradle 
among them all. 
From this fundamental insight, \\18 
have endeavored to create a system for 
text editing and retrieval that will 
receive, and handle, and present, doc­
uments with links between them. We 
believe there is something very right 
about the existing system of litera­
ture; indeed we suspect that there are 
LITERARY things right a.bout it that \\18 don't 
even know, as with Nature. And so we 
have tried to mirror, and replicate, 
and extend, existing literary struc­
ture as \\18 have here described it. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 15 ---

2. 3 A TRUE STORAGE SYSTEM FOR TEXT 
AND OTHER EVOLVING STRUCTURES 
We are going to propose a way of keeping information that may 
seem odd and inefficient at first, but turns out to have remark­
able power later on. 
PROLOGUE: 
MAKING EXTRA COPIES ALL THE TIME 
In most computer applications 
(such as the layman's newest game, 
"word processing,") it is often neces­
sary to keep repeated copies. This 
frequent and disagreeable problem has 
several purposes. 
The obvious purpose, often thwar­
ted, is to assure the safety of recent 
work against various kinds of accident. 
But that can be gradually ruled out: 
many systems are coming to make reli­
able "safety copies" automatically. 
A more fundamental use is to keep 
track of former states of the work, in 
case mistakes or wrong decisions need 
to be undone. This need, backtrack, 
is serious and important. We do not 
need to go back through previous ma-
LITERARY terial often, but if we need to do it 
at all we ought to be able to do it 
rignt. Here is what doing it right 
entails. 
DEPARTMENT OF REDUNDANCY DEPARTMENT 
Note, however, that the conven­
tional means of storage is rather 
silly. It involves making a complete 
copy of everything you've done so far. 
If what you're doing is making repeat­
ed small changes and additions, then 
you are repeatedly storing the same 
material, redundantly. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 16 ---

Under many circumstances the writer, or "text user," needs to 
reach back to a former condition. This is in the nature of 
creative work. 
Virtually all of computerdom is 
built around this curious convention.* 
Most computer people will tell you 
that is the way God intended computers 
to be used. 
--
I 
However, we can program computers 
any way we like, if we throw out the 
system software, and what we are talk­
ing about is creating ~ ways of do­
ing things. 
THE ALTERNATIVE 
Suppose we create instead an auto­
matic storage system that takes care 
of all changes and backtrack automat-ically. As a user makes changes, the 
changes go directly into the storage 
system; filed, as it were, chronologi­
cally.* Now with the proper sort of 
indexing scheme, the storage facility 
we've mentioned ought also to be able 
to deal with the problem of historical 
backtrack. 
Think of it this way. An evol­
ving document is really not just atm 
block of text characters, Scrabble 
tiles all in a row; it is an ongoing 
changing flux. Think of its progress 
through time as a sort of braid or 
vortex. ~ _bOC\JM~l(r 'S rt.?', ''-i 
W ~OL~'l(s-
0~6-0/((j- r!R~!i> 
• I.llc:lwling blodt-'!%an•f•r cizc:uitry, :11081: display butte.ring, and t."le disk routines supplied wi.t.11. 
cc:mven e.ion&l ope.rating systam.s. 
••(of course, since the storage system assimilates all changes, it becomes nearly 
the whole "word processor,• except for the uaer' s !raat end.) 
LITERARY 1/U MACHINES 

--- Page 17 ---

The true storage of text should be in a system that stores each 
change and fragment individually, assimilating each change as it arrives, but keeping the former changes; integrating them all 
by means of an indexing method that allows any previous instant 
to be reconstructed. 
Think of the process of making editor­
ial changes as re-twisting this braid 
when its parts are rearranged, added 
or subtracted, 
..... ,., ---.._ 
and think then of successive versions 
of the document, at successive in­
stants of time, as slices in this 
space-time vortex. 
LITERARY Very well: the file management system 
we are talking about automatically 
keeps track of the changes and the 
pieces, so that when you ask for a 
given part of a given version at a 
given time, it comes to your screen. 
The user may then refer not merely 
to the present version of the docu­
ment; he or she may go back in time to 
any previous version. The user must 
also be able to follow a specific sec­
tion back through time, and study its 
previous states. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 18 ---

This can be done efficiently if the user is reading from a com­
puter screen; since you can set up the system to reconstruct 
hastily any piece that is wanted at the instant it is wanted. 
THE PART YOU WANT COMES WHEN YOU ASK FOR IT. 
PART-POUNCE 
This system is built around the 
assumption that you are reading from 
a screen, not from paper. When you 
"go to a certain part" of a document, 
that whole document is not ready to 
show; yet the system gives you that 
part instantly, assembling it~~ 
run from the many fragments of its ac- -tual storage. We call this pounce. You pounce 
like a cat on a given thing, and it 
seems to be there, having been con­
structe d while you are, as it were, in 
midair. Unlike things which demater­
ialize when you poW1ce on them, like 
cotton candy, this materializes when 
you poWlce on it. I can think of no 
other example, except perhaps Potemkin 
villages. 
• Obviously such a systea daparts frca ccnventional "block" storage, and rather stores material in 
fragments undar ccntrol of a aa■ter c!irectory indexing by time,-- and other factors. 
LITERARY 'ffds method stores the documen t canon­
ically as a system of evolvin g and al­
temative versions, instant ly construc­
ted as need from the stored fragments, 
pointers and lists of our unusual data 
structure. Thu• there is no "main" 
version of a thing, just the ongoing 
accumulation of pieces and changes, 
soae of whose permutations have names 
and special linkages. In other words, 
our system treats all versions of a 
documetn as views extracted from the 
same aggregated object. It vill be 
readily apparent that the only way to 
do this is effectively to have direct 
track-and-sector access to the disk 
system. 
(footnote continued on next page) 
MACHINES 

--- Page 19 ---

This is the true structure of text, because text is best viewed 
as an evolving, Protean structure. 
You get ~ part you ~ ~; 
the mistake of the conventional compu­
ter field has been to assume that the 
whole document had to be formed and 
ready. 
y,~ a.sk ~r 
~ a~'r~'" Ptrl.r 
IMI ~ t ~,\lij :&vE;••>, 
at I et.Y1i ,._ f01'1.t 1' 1,-. f. 
(continued from previous footnote) 
This is in contradiatinction to 
conventional operating syste1118, fron 
CP/H to OS/370, which typically deliv­
er the whole file on every request. 
The illustration depicts the operating 
system as Frankenstein's monster with 
a silver tray. (These features may 
usually be defeated, but that's another ~_d, ~Iii, 
matter.> tr lt:~CC . ~I/I• ~, .. :r "", 
(l,tQull t~ICOL 
LITERARY ANOTHER VISUALIZATION 
The canonical documents in this 
system can store teh same material in 
numerous different versions-- as, for 
example, in the successive drafts of 
a novel. 
While the user of a customary ed­
iting or word processing system may 
scroll through an individual document, 
the user of this system may scroll in 
rt 1...t.~\S~ of ~Y5~i.~~ 
~ "' (T J)O 
And storage space is sa vad by not 
having to k••P redundant p~. This 
in itsel~ is not ver/ impori:.ant. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 20 ---

Such storage permits easy reconstruction of previous states for 
mental clarification, fresh starts, and transfusions of previous 
ideas. It also permits multiple uses of the same materials for 
alternative versions and "boilerplate." 
time as well as space, watching the 
changes in a given passage as the sys­
tem enacts its successive modifica­
tions. 
1croll in space 
Versions of a document set apart for 
other reasons-- "alternative" versions 
--may likewise be flipped through or 
efficiently compared side by side. 
LITERARY We call this system of storage 
Prismatic because we may think of a 
given part, or section, as being pris­
matically refracted when we pass from 
one version to another. We believe 
our Prismatic storage can support vir­
tually instantaneous retrieval of any 
portion of any version (historical or 
alternative). 
MACHINES 

--- Page 21 ---

This same approach-- storage as an evolving structure with back­track-- may be extended toall forms of data that are created by individuals. 
ALTERNATIVE VERSIONS 
This same scheme can be expanded 
to allow alternative versions-- more 
than one arrangement of the same ma­
terials, a facility that writers and 
programmers would certainly use if it 
were readily available. Alternative 
versions (or Alts) are also important 
in many boilerplate applications, such 
as law and public relations, where the 
same materials are churned out repeat­
edly in different arrangements and 
variations. A master indexing scheme 
could greatly reduce storage require­
ments in these applications, as well 
as make the relations among the Alts 
much clearer.~~ 
Vl 
Plan 
V2 
V3 
ALTERNATIVE VERSIONS Actually, we may best visualize 
these alternative versions as a tree 
in the ongoing braid, a forking ar­
rangement whereby one document becomes 
two, each of these daughter documents 
may in turn become others, etc. 
•·sy arranging for alternative Vt!rsions to share coanon storage of the document 's fragments, again w save space. 
LITERARY MACHINES 

--- Page 22 ---

Pictures, and graphical data structures created at a screen, 
evolve in the same way and should be stored in the same way. 
SAMENESS AND DIFFERENCE DISPIAY 
Of course, a facility that holds 
multiple versions of the same mater­
ial, and allows historical backtrack, 
is not terribly useful unless it can 
help you intercompare them in detail 
--unless it can show you, word for 
word, what parts of two versions are 
the same. 
Lawyers need this to compare word­
ings. Congressmen need this to com­
pare different draft versions of bills. 
Authors need it to see what has hap­
pened to specific passages in their 
writings between drafts. Biologists 
and anatomists need it to compare cor­
responding parts of animals (assuming 
a graphical data base of physiology 
that shows evolving structure). 
ANY FORMS OF DATA 
This storage and indexing by 
pieces and changes works not merely 
for text; it can be used for any forms 
of data structure. Thus if your are designing a building 
on a computer screen, as architects 
now do, you may browse through the 
changing design in the sequence you 
modified it over time, and create al­
ternative versions as you like which 
share the common material. 
Example. 
An excellent airplane, the Boeing 
747, now exists in a dozen or more 
versions that you may order from the 
factory. Complex blueprints exist for 
each of these versions, as well as 
lists of parts, etc. (Much of this is 
kept on computers as 3D data struc­
tures at Boeing, and perhaps quite 
well; this is simply a convenient ex­
ample, and no criticism is intended.) 
• (Such inter~isons would in a 1110n c:cnventional system require writing and invoking search com­
unds of soma c:caplexity uiong the various related file•.) 
LITERARY MACHINES 

--- Page 23 ---

As a first step we propose such an evolutionary struc~ure~ the docuplex, as the basic storage structure for electronic literature. 
Using the data structure and pro­
grams we have described, it is possi­
ble to store all the 747 designs as 
~ unified ~ pool, with the 
forking-version facility reading the 
variant designs directly out of this 
single structure. 
SIMPLICITY ONE 
By creating such a capable stor­
age system, we have greatly simplified 
the life of the text user. The nuis­
ance of backup (and the spurious non­
sense-task of finding names for backup 
files) are eliminated. But more im­
portant, we have unified all versions 
(previous and alternative) in a uni­
fied structure, the docuplex, permit­
ting part-pounce on present, past and 
variatn structures. The user may 
scroll through any two versions to see 
corresponding parts; and much more. 
LITERARY STAGE ONE ALL TOGETHER 
I have so far presented several 
new capabilities that I think are im­
portant: alternative versions and~­
torical backtrack, both with sameness 
display; and links. 
These work together; they have to. 
The links allow the creation of non­
sequential writings, bookmarks and 
jump-structured graphics of many kinds. 
But if you are going to have links you 
really need historical backtrack and 
alternative versions. 
Why? Because if you make some 
links on Monday and go on making 
changes, perhaps on Wednesday you'd 
like to follow those links into the present version. They'd better still 
be attached to the right parts, even 
though the parts may have moved. And 
the sameness-display allows complex 
linked alternatives to be studied and 
intercompared in depth. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 24 ---

LITERAhY So let us call this Stage One: a 
system of computer storage that holds 
pieces of a thing, not big blocks, and 
assembles them instantly into whatever 
part of whatever version you ask for; 
that allows you to create links of any 
kind you want between any things you 
want; and shows you which parts are 
the same between related versions. 
Let us call such a storage system 
a hyperfile. 
You don't have to use these facil-
ities. 
blocks 
ity is 
it can You can store text in long 
if you wish. But if the facil­
there, then the people who need 
use it. 
Perhaps most important, these fa­
cilities provide a building-block for 
what is to be described in what follows. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 25 ---

2• 4 A LINKING SYSTEM FOR TEXT AND OTHER DATA 
Assuming that we are storing materials in such an evolutionary 
structure, the creation of "links" to the material becomes much 
easier. 
LINKS ARE PART OF THE WRITING 
A link is simply a connection be­
tween parts of text or other material. 
It is put in by a human. Links are 
made by individuals as pathways for 
the reader's exploration; thus they 
are parts of the actual document, part 
of the writing. 
As perhaps the simplest type of 
link, a user may create book-marks-­
places he may want to re-enter text 
when returning to it. 
JUMPING ON A LINK JUMP-LINK 
As another simple first example, 
let us simply think of a link as some 
sort of a jump opportunity, like a 
conventional footnote. An asterisk, 
say, signals that "there's something 
to jump to from here." If you point 
at it with your lightpen (or mouse or 
whatever), Bingo!-- you're now at the 
footnote, or whatever else the author 
took you to. If you don't like it 
there, hit some sort of a Retuxn But­
ton and it pops your previous address 
from a stack, so here you are back 
where you were and no harm has been 
done. 
Reader dags 
link marker Linked material 
"1iown Reader returns 
and continues 
11ll I dlu ·1ll111111lu, C: 
''" lh1M>C '""' 11111 * '----~ 
c-,11111111 1111 ,•,11ll1u1 
11111 •111ll1111lc 111111 <111 
11111 11111 dlo •1ll111,11lu1 
LITERARY ',1111ll11 ,111 c - l11111lch1 ·.,,,• :, 
1 •111llcu1lc 1h111 cll1011I cll11111h 
ch•1 111m 11111 1111111lcl1•1 01111 ul11 ·,ll,1rn 
/1t11 1111 1 duu 
1•111, 11lcl1•1 11l111 
·111ll1111lc 1•1111 <111 ,1.,11 
'"' ,·111111111 
ll11l ·11111 l11c-,1111ll11 
MACHINES 

--- Page 26 ---

You may want links for commentaries, bookmarks and placemarkers, 
footnotes, marginal notes, hypertext jumps and innumerabl e other 
uses: but they are very hard to keep in place with convent ional 
computer storage structure. 
MARGINAL NCJl'ES, 
SIDE-BY-SIDE WRITING 
Marginal notes are another simple 
and important type of link. (Where 
the "margin" of the screen is--that 
is, how to show them--is a matter 
particular to your own screen setup.) 
PARALLEL LINKED TEXT 
* LINKS + PRISMATICS-,. USABILITY A user may also make side-by-side 
connections of other types. On con­
templating any two pieces of text, he 
may make a link between them. There­
after, when he displays either piece 
of text, and asks ~ ~ the links, 
a link-symbol is displayed, and the 
other attached text--if he wishes to 
see it. 
Naturally, making a marginal note 
consists of writing the note and hook­
ing the link. 
HYPERTEXT 
The link facility gives us much 
more than the attachment of mere odds 
and ends. It perm.its fully non-sequen­
tial writing, or hypertext. 
Most computer schemes for linkage face the terrible problem of "updat­
ing" the links as text is modified and successive versions come in-co oei:ig. 
The present scheme dodges this problem smartly (at least at the loca~ level): 
a link is attached, not to a positional address in a given version, ~ut to 
specific characters, and simply stays with them wherever they go. ~~us 
Prismatic storage solves a considerable problem. 
LITERARY MACHINES 

--- Page 27 ---

However, the evolutionary storage we have already described allows 
any links to be associated firmly with the pieces of data in any 
evolving structure, wherever those pieces may migrate to as changes 
occur. 
\ This simple facility- the jump­
link capability-- leads immediately 
to all sorts of new text forms: for 
scholarship, for teaching, for fic­
tion, for hyper-poetry. This makes 
possible a certain free-form serendi­
pitous browsing. 
~~e.1'.~r ~ ~ ----------"-----------------=-~'--_-+_._:.;;, ____ _ 
t• ICS (continued from previous footnote) 
/ Thus the link stays 
where you put it through 
historical backtrack and 
in alternative versions-­
if you choose to see it. Jorward throush versions; ~lj·f · --:L ': 
backward throU,Bh version,; 
also "sideway&" to alternative ver1ion.r. 
Essentially, the link seizes a point or span (or any other structure) 
in the Prismatic Document and holds to it. Links may be refractively fol­
lowed from a point or span in one version to corresponding places in any 
other version. Thus a link to one version of a Prismatic Document is a 
link to all versions. 
The effects, then, of links, alts 
and backtrack are in some sense multi­
plicative: together they give you a 
united facility of great power. 
LITERARY Z/2Z MACHINES 

--- Page 28 ---

And any types of links may be created. 
ANY TYPES OF LINK$ 
A proper system should allow any 
types of link whatever, and there are 
myriads of types. 
In principle we allow any types 
of link to be defined by the sophisti­
cated user. These include point-to­
point links, point-to-span, and span­
to-span, having any separate names and 
END-SETS 
Links may attach to other links. 
Thus we have the concept of an end-set, 
the several types of object that a 
given link may attach to. 
Consider, for example, an arbi-
trary type of link which we may call 
a "wuffle." A wuffle, let us say, 
connects a span of text, a picture, 
and a footnote. These are the end2arts; 
together they constitute a wuffle's 
end-set. (-~i 
LITERARY .c..z 4, f•&1v-<.. 
1~4~ .. , ,~l-, functions desired. We also allow 
links with multiple endpoints. 
lr"Y (.HI~ Of t IN(_ 
~ 
Directionality, if any, is given in 
the link-type definition. Note that 
end-parts may not hang together as 
they evolve (e.g. text sections}: 
" fl"•rtErlA_l(. "8W ~-=-., H --· -----
"~-~--·-~J"'"' t-l~ 
~ )/ -- . .svl•1-) -· --
MACHINES 

--- Page 29 ---

LINKS AND FRONT ENDS 
How to show links is a Front-End -Function. So is the problem of keep-
ing track of where you have been as 
you browsed; the front end must manage 
your stacks for you. 
D 
rT~( -,11~ ~\..Dtes:s~r 
;o ~ 11\'<1' 
LITERARY LINKING AMONGST ALL DATA TYPES 
~lL ~ff.~ ~t<Jot1Jfl~ 
MI\Y &c "'"-t.t,eJ 
It is vital that a general system 
not have restrictions. For instance, 
why should you just have links on 
text? We believe you should be able 
to put footnotes and marginal notes on 
pictures, on music-- on any forms of 
data. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 30 ---

2.s THE DOCUMENT CONVENTION 
From these beginnings, it will be possible to create many levels of 
organization and overlay-- but first we will adopt by convention 
a fundamental unit. 
So far we allow the storage of any 
sort of text (etc.) and any sort of 
links bet~en points and passages of 
text. If anybody may put in and change 
anything, we stand to get simply a cha­
otic blur, a single muddy pool. 
The solution is straightforward 
and traditional, and derives from lit­
erature as we have known it. We make 
sure that everything stored is divided 
precisely into separate documents. 
An interesting choice has been 
made in the design of this structure. 
A document consists of anything 
that someone wishes to store. A docu­
ment is something designated by a per­
son to~ a document, containing text 
and/or links that he has created. We 
call a thing a "document" whether it 
contains text, or links, or both. Thus the Gettysburg Address is a 
document; "Jabberwocky" is a document; 
and a set of links between them, were 
someone to create it, could be yet a 
separate document. 
By this convention, then, every­
thing in the system is a document and 
has an owner. No free-floating mater­
ials exist. What this convention 
really does is stress the singularity 
of each document, its external and in­
ternal borders. Thus, we focus on the 
integrity of the "document" as we've 
known it. Evolutionary continuity is 
unambiguous. 
Every document has an owner. The 
rightful copyright holder, or someone 
who has permission from the copyright 
holder and pays for storage, is essen­
tially the owner as far as the system 
is concerned. Only the owner has a 
right to change or withdraw a document. 
LITERARY 2/ts MACHINES 

--- Page 31 ---

We will call this unit a "document." It has an owner and (ordi­narily) a name. 
It normally consists of contents-- text, graphics, music, etc.-­
and links to other documents. 
(Although there are ways that others 
may conveniently have the use of 
changed versions that suit their needs, 
as we will see in a later section.) 
Ancient documents are owned by 
the system-- or preferably by some 
high-minded literary body that over­
sees their royalties (to be discussed 
later). 
LITERARY OWNERSHIP OF LINKS 
Links may be created within or be­
tween documents. But each link resides 
in one place. 
Links, just like text, are owned. 
Every link is part of a particular doc­
ument and has an owner. 
However, links in one document may 
attach to another document. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 32 ---

Every link, then, is part of a document. 
Putting it another way, a document consists of its contents and its 
out-links. 
And that's all. 
Ordinarily a document consits of its 
contents (including history and alterna­
tives} and its out-links. These out­
links are under control of its owner, 
whereas its in-links are not.~ 
f·--\o ut~ ~ ~, 
'lC' More elaborate cases are possible, how- ~ g_ 
ever. For instance, links between doc- ~ y 
uments may reside in yet others. 
LITERARY Z/l7 ~•1.t.. .,--rl~ 
~r~·ri . . 
~I 
MACHINES 

--- Page 33 ---

2.6 COMPOUND DOCUMENTS 
This ground rule allows us to have complex multi-level document 
structures-- criss-crossing superdocuments of many parts-­
collected in new structural wholes. 
Once you have the package, the 
docuplex that allows linkage and back­
track, why not extend it? 
Why not allow anyone to create 
links between documents, allowing you 
to jump straight from one to another? 
Given the exact documant boundar­
ies and ownership alr•ady mentioned, 
we can now create an orderly arrange­
:nent permitting far more complex docu­
ments to be stored. We also provide 
an arrangement allowing other individ­
uals freely to make their own modifi­
cations on the stored documants. This 
we do by allowing so-<:alled •compound 
documents.• 
The logic ot theN compound docu­
ments is simple and d•rive ■ from the 
concept of document ownership. Every 
document has an owner. Tha integrity 
of this docwnent is maintained: no 
one may change it but the owner. 
But saneone elsa may create a 
document which quotes it a■ mucb as 
desired. This rnechan1sm we call the ~-window or quote-link. Through a 
"wfiiaown in the new docwiiant we see a 
portion ot 1~ old. iv,N~ '."ffi 
/ >// 
Thus a naw document may consist 
of the quote-links and new material, rr any. 
:I r~ '---· ~"4::-..:_;-,~ 
' . -, -----
Through the same document conven­
tions, the compound structures men­
tioned earlier maintain the same con­
ventions of integrity and ownership. 
LITERARY 1/28 MACHINES 

--- Page 34 ---

Each collection is likewise a document, and likewise has an owner. 
The secondary document, too, has its own integrity, though the windowed 
materials are still ?art of the orig­
inal document. 
A document may have a window to 
another document, and that one to yet 
another, indefinitely. Thus A con~ tains part of a, and so on. One docu­
:nent can be built upon another, and 
yet another document can be built upon that one, indefinitely: each having 
links to what was already in place. 
Anything stored by one user on the 
system may be quoted-- adopted into a 
document-- by anot.~er person writing on 
the system (provided the second user 
has legitimate access). This freedom of windowing applies, of course, to all 
forms of data, including ?ictures, ~us­ical notation, etc. Think of the ?resent document as 
a sheet of glass. It may have ·..rriting 
?ainted on it by t.118 present author: i: ~ay have wi.;ldows to something else, 
in turn made of more layers of painted 
glass, with writing on each. 
ltep throqh 
to other docu.men14 
and uplore them. 
A reader JUay either explore the 
immediate document, or ~step thro~gh 
the window~ to explore the next docu­
ment, or the one beyond. After explor­
ing a further doc-..nnent, t.~e reader may return to the one t..1la.t showed hi.:n into it, or proceed on tangents that become available. 
LITERARY 'Z/2? MACHINES 

--- Page 35 ---

Document A can include Document B, even though Document Bis 
owned er_ someone else. 
By this simple, sweeping mechan­
ism, all manner of different require­
ments and specialized uses are reduced 
to a single structure. Each layer of 
windows may have, as it were, colored 
cellophane or opaquing on it. Only 
when you stip through the window-­
which you a ways may at any time-- do 
you reach the original. But stepping 
through the window means turning one 
glass page and going on in the next. 
Now you are in another work. 
Examele. The annual report of a 
corporat.1.on has a brief paragraph on 
every division of the company, with 
summary operating figures for the year. 
These paragraphs and figures are quo­
ted from other documents which explain 
the :natters more fully: the reader may easily step through to study them fur­
ther. 
Ex~le. A children's story is il­lustraeewith pictures. If the child 
wants to "reach through the window," 
each picture is found to be part of a 
larger picture, with another story at­
tached. 
The windows of a windowing docu­
ment are themselves actually particular 
links between documents. No copy is 
made of the quoted material; rather, a 
quote-link symbol (or its essential e­
quivalent) is placed ih the stored sym­
bol-train of the quoting document. This 
quotation does not affect the integrity 
or uniqueness of the original document, 
since no copy is made. Nor does it af­
fect the ownership. 
LAYERS OF WINDOWING TEXT. Each horizontal line is a document. 
In a library: 
top document 
windowing to 
----------,.----~ 
l"llfflfflt'llla ri~. ------------------------
quota ti om. 
oriitinal9. 
ROVE OPTIONS --•-i----flllllllll----• 
field documents. 
• ,~•. Rl",·i:sion 
: I,, 
replae~ment report, 
holding 
cha~eable data, 
' . .. .. 
•\' '.•· . ' ' ' . ' '' . ' 9ubreporu, 
and 
ac-counu. 
·: Re,·ision 
hv 
rearranl!ement 

--- Page 36 ---

(Note that these methods of stor­
age save a great deal of space, if the 
same material is used in numerous docu­
ments.) 
The use of the special links dram­
atical.ly simplifies a host of problems. 
~o copying operations are required 
among the documents throughout the sys­
tem, and thus the problems of distri­
buted update, so familiar throughout 
the computer world, are obviated. (But 
they do reappear on a later level.) 
Since quoted material only has to 
reside in its place of origin, and not 
in the other documents that quote it, 
other documents that quote it may be 
automatically •updated• when its owner 
changes it. 
Note also, however, that a window 
may be fixed to a document at a certain 
point in time, in which case revisions 
are seen by the user only when he asks, 
"'flh.at has this passage become?" DERIVATIVE DOCUMENTS 
The integrity of each document is 
maintained by these separations: deri­
vative documents are pei:manently de­
fined in terms of the originals and the 
changes. (And stored on that basis.) 
A document may consist merely of 
changes to another document. Thus the 
modified Gettysburg Address published 
in MAD by Doodles Weaver may be t.~ought 
of as two documents: the original, and 
the changes. 
ALTERNATIVE VERSIONS BY NON-OWNERS 
~ document owner may create alter­
native.arrangements of the same mater­ial, all within the same document.* 
Another user, however, is free to 
create his own alternative version of 
the document he does not own. This, 
then, becomes a windowing document 
using the same materials. 
* The official naming-mechanism of t.~e 
svstem has "document" and "version" 
fields. See "Tumbling through t~e 
Docuverse," a Chap~er 4. 
LITERARY z;,, MACHINES 

--- Page 37 ---

-INTERCOMPARISON DOCUMENTS 
A doc:wnent that points out rela­
tions between other doc:uments we may 
calJ. an "intercomparison document." 
Such documents may be easily created, 
say, to point out relations between 
the Bible and the Dead Sea Scrolls. 
Ql~\~o 
o,--+c:Jt,; c:2 
i:::::\ ~ -'--"' ____ _ --· 
COMPOUNDING OF OTHER LINK TYPES 
'Any other link types (beside win­
dows) may likewise go from one docu­
ment to another, and. interweave with 
quote-links. 
Note that links, like text and picturs, may£! quoted. 
These st:J:Ucturas may of course 
nest ... This makes possible compljund 
documents to any remove, where one 
document links to another, and so on. 
One document, embracing another, 
takes it into itself. 
iv+\{ ~, H1 
I 
~ j I And this creates a basis for all 
kinds of hypertext- linked, paraJ.lal, 
windowing. 
~--T•· ..... ·•··••·•--·-·•· 
□------------------
COMPOUND NESTED LINKS 
.;( AN INTERESTING WORLD 
It will be noted that we have 
here defined an interesting and rich 
sort of world-- a world in which we 
are relieved of complications from 
conventional computer filing; yet 
we have greatly enhanced abilities 
to specify and express compound re­
lations of every sort. 
~ !A>Olt C.j) 0 F . ' 1 lJ re ,g_,., ~'~ I \ 
' /7 
.,, 
MACHINES 

--- Page 38 ---

••• SOT A SIMPLE ONE 
~his world nevertheless remains 
simple in design. The virtualitr is 
simple in structure and repeats lll 
layers. 
LITERARY MACHINES 

--- Page 39 ---

2:7 ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING 
MAKING THE LITERARY SYSTEM UNIVERSAL 
Beyond its use as a private facility, we intend that this system be usable as a publication system. Thus a carefully designed system of publication, surprisingly like that of paper, has been worked out. 
The orderliness and power of this approach are very suggestive. Given the hyperfile with links that we just expoun­
ded: Why can't we extend it into a full publishing system? 
Suppose that the hyper-documents al­ready stored could be reached and used by anyone. All that we need additionally is the ability to create links among them-­to make your own bookmarks and marginal notes, to quote from them by direct ex­cision. And why not, indeed, allow users 
to publish assemblies and collections of 
compound documents building on the others? 
Very well. Let us try to put to­gether a publishing system-- that is, an overall arrangement where some of the 
documents stored in the "true" structure 
I have described may be made available publicly. 
LITERARY What does this mean exactly? Well, 
a publishing system, as we see it, 
should include provisions for privacy, copyright, royalty and accounting. 
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE 
The idea of "publication" in this 
system, as it is clarified below, will 
show what we mean by both private and public documents. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 40 ---

We can therefore have a system of electronic publishing that feeds 
to your computer screen exactly what you ask for, as soon as you 
ask for it; with royalties divided between the document owners in 
exact proportion to how much of their materials are transmitted or 
used. 
A document may be private~ pub­
lished. A published document may in­
clude text, links, alternative versions 
and historical backtrack. But it need 
not. 
Any user may store anything on the 
system. Unless specified otherwise it 
is a private document. A private docu­
ment may be read and linked-to only by 
the owner and his associates. A pub­
lished document is available to anyone, 
and may be read and linked-to by anyone. 
INTERNAL COPYRIGHT CONVENTION 
To bypass legal problems, we intend 
to establish a copyright convention 
internal to the network and agreed upon 
by all participants. To wit, if you 
publish a thing through the network, you 
have to agree to the same rules as 
everybody else-- which are intended to 
create a fair balance of incentives. 
More on this later, when the choices des­
cribed here will be further discussed. 
LITERARY LINKING TO WHAT-HAVE-YOU 
Any user may read, or otherwise em­
ploy, any published document on the sys­
tem, or any private document to which he 
has legitimate access. He can make any 
kind of links to it from his own cocu­
ments, private or not. 
NO CONTROL OVER IN-LINKS 
Accessibility and free linking make 
a two-sided coin. On the one hand, each 
user is free to link to anything priv­
ately or publicly. By the same token, 
each author of a published work is re­
linquishing the right to control links 
into that work. This relinquishment is 
part of the publishing contract. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 41 ---

"Private" materials are available only to their owners or designees; 
"published" materials are available to anyone, yielding a royalty to the owners. 
THE ACT OF PUBLICATION 
If the user chooses to publish a 
document, he may do so with relative 
ease, making it available to anyone 
throughout the network. It is then a 
published document. 
Because publication is an important 
act, both for authors and readers, we 
make publication a solemn event, to be 
undertaken cautiously. Since publishing 
can be instantaneous and unrestricted, 
merely a "publish" button on the con­
sole could do it--but the dangers of 
rash publication to an individual's rep­
utation and career could be great. Some 
formalized technique would therefore be 
required for "coimnitting to publish"-­
probably a ceremony and signature; pre­
sumably signing a contract on something 
very like a credit-card triplicate slip. 
The author signs an "I hereby publish" 
form, after which not only is the docu­
ment universally available, but he can't 
withdraw it. 
LITERARY NO WITHDRAWAL; SUPERSESSION; 
OTHERS' LINKS 
Publishing is a solemn act, and it 
is in the common interest that a thing 
once published stay published, as in the 
world of paper. Consequently its author. 
may not withdraw it except by lengthy 
due process. 
However, the author may readily 
publish a superseding document, but the 
former version remains on the network. 
This is vital because of the links other 
users may have made to it--which can 
reach through from the previous version 
to which they are attached into the 
newer version. 
SUPERSESSION WITH NOTICE 
It can easily be assured that fresh 
readers turning to an old version of a 
document may be directed to the new, un­
less they have reason to consult the old. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 42 ---

Private documents can link and window to public ones. 
PRIVASHING 
An author who wishes to render his 
work universally available, but wishes 
also to retain the right to withdraw it 
at any time, has a simple means for so 
doing. He simply designates his docu­
ment as a private document with unres­
tricted distribution. Anyone may have 
access to it or use it, but the owner is 
free to withdraw it or change it irre­
callably at any time. 
No royalty is received for the use 
of privashed documents. 
PRIVATE SALE OF INFORMATION 
Those information purveyors not sat­
isfied with our private rates are free to 
store what they like as private encoded 
documents and then sell access, or sell 
the secret code to make them readable, or 
whatever. This is a private transaction 
and does not involve the system. 
LITERARY ROYALTY FOR USE 
In our planned service, a standard 
proportional fee is paid automatically 
by the user to the owner every time a 
fragment is summoned. Each owner must 
consent to the standard royalty-- say, a 
few cents per screen hour-- and each 
reader contributes those few cents auto­
matically as he reads along. If the 
back-end cost of servicing a user is, 
say, $2 per screen-hour, then the royal­
ty will be 5¢ to 10¢ for that hour. This 
is deducted automatically from the back­
end fees. 
Since there is no controlling.what 
happens at the user end, this royalty 
should be largely based on transmission 
time. An hour, five minutes, or one sec­
ond of a thing, each contribute propor­
tionally to the copyright holders' ac­
counts. (The question of whether to al­
low different rates of royalty will be 
discussed later.) 
The royalty goes to the owner. We 
say "owner" here to avoid having to dis­
tinguish between authors and publishers; 
but this is a matter cf private arrange­
ments that is of no concern at the sys­
tem level. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 43 ---

This is a radical and daring idea; a new form of reading and writing, in a way just like the old, with quotations and marginalia ~nd citations. Yet it will also be socially self-constructing into a vast new traversible framework, a new literature. 
THE REAL POWER: 
PUBLISHING COMPOUND DOCUMENTS 
The windowing approaches already mentioned automatically furnish a general solution to the "copyright problem" with regard to quotation and citation, simply by this means: authors who are windowed automatically get royalties as well. If the windowing document is electronically 
published, royalties are paid to the own­er of each document seen in proportion to its use. 
Since the copyright holder gets an automatic royalty, anything may~ quoted without further permission. That is, permission has already been granted: for part of the publication contract is the provision, "I agree that anyone may link and window to my document." Publication through such a net requires your permis­sion for your work to be quoted ad lib. You publish something, anyone c~u;;-it, you always get a royalty automatically. Fair. PUBLISHING MODIFIED VERSIONS 
You can create ~published docu­ments~ of old ones indefinitely, 
making whatever changes seem appropriate 
without damaging the originals. 
This means a whole new pluralistic publishing form. If anything which is already published can be included in any­thing newly published, any new viewpoint can be fairly presented. (Especially if the reader can always say, "Show me what this was originally.•• J 
If a modified document is read, the original owner and the modifier split the royalty in proportion to who wrote what, as determined automatically. (For royal­ties on links, see "Tuning," Chapter 2.) 
For example, my great-grandfather, 
Edmund Gale Jewett, believed that one word in Hamlet was incorrect. (It should have been siege of troubles, not "sea" of trou­bles, in the well-known soliloquy.) 
Very well: if Hamlet is already on the system, then E.G. Jewett could pub­lish his own Hamlet very easily: a quote­link to the whole original, except for 
LITERARY 2/fiB'" which is chang;;~;~;~S 

--- Page 44 ---

Given that anything on such a network may be available instantly , 
such an arrangement promises an extraordinary new level of capa­bility. For not only may simple documents be accessed at once, 
but compounded and windowing documents may be overlaid on anything --promising a new degree of understandability through what is 
added later. 
Now, the obvious rules of the road 
should be as follows: 
1. Shakespeare's Hamlet is of course 
unchanged and available instantly. 
2. Jewett's modified version of Ham­
let, composed almost entirely of the 
original, is also available instantly. 
{Jewett may give it any title he 
wants.) 
3. Shakespeare-- or presumably the 
Authors' Fund--gets the royalties for 
whatever of Shakespeare's Hamlet is 
summoned by readers. 
4. When people read Jewett's Hamlet, 
the Authors' Fund still gets the roy­
alty on Shakespeare's behalf almost 
all the time. But Jewett gets a min­
ute proportional royalty for the 
change he has made, whenever a reader 
encounters that part. 5. Anyone reading Jewett' s Hamlet can 
say, "Show me the original of this 
next to it," or just "Take me to the 
original. " 
6. Anyone reading Shakespeare's Ham­
let can say: "What documents have 
links to this?" or "Are there any al­
ternative versions?" and get a list 
that includes Jewett' s version.~ 
SECURITY RAMIFICATIONS OF WINDOWING 
These ideas simplify the creation 
of rationally-ordered document dissemi­
nation systems with clear-cut security. 
A document can only window documents with 
the same, or lesser, security level. For 
instance, a private document may window a 
published document, but not vice versa. 
• Yot• alao the IIOdeat coat should Jewatt publish thia1 the stora9e cost tor a few hundred bytes 
(ID, pointers and chAngea). 
LITERARY 2/31 MACHINES 

--- Page 45 ---

It is our unusual hope and vision that this, with its simplicity of approach and efficiency of implementation, may become the standard publishing medium of the future. 
SHOWING AND SIEVmG m-LINKS 
The reader should be able to ask, for a given document or place in the doc­ument, "What connects here from other documents?"-- and be shown all these out­side connections without appreciable delay. H 
But there may be too many. Indeed, for "Alice in Wonderland" or the U.S. Constitution, the number could be in the squillions. 
Thus it becomes necessary to apply some kind of filter, saying, "What links come in from Spain? From last week? From last year in Marienbad?"-- and see the number of such links at once, fol­lo~d by the linked documents themselves if desired. 
This must all be fast enough to please the impatient on-line user. And we believe it can be done. This filter­ing by different attributes we call "sieving"; and it can only be set up for a comparatively small number of traits-­say, location and author and time.*• 
• Technically Kn<>wledgeable readers may note that E.h!,! is the hardest feature. This is the stopper. But ,,.. believe it can be done. 
•• Of course, any amount of additional sieving can be put in at the front end. 
LITERARY MACHINES 

--- Page 46 ---

ALL END-USE IS LEGITIMATE 
The user may employ any terminal, 
graphical or printing. Viewing-methods 
and manipulations are up to the terminal 
designer. No restraint is contemplated 
as to what use may be made of the mater­
ials found on the system, since no res­
traint is possible. 
There is no way whatever to ascer­
tain or control what happens at the users' 
terminals. Therefore perforce all use 
whatever is legitimate, and anyone who 
plans to be vulnerable to "misuse," what­
ever he thinks that may be, had better 
keep his stuff off the system. PRINTOUT AT USER TERMINAL 
LITERARY Users are thus free to make printed 
copies for their own use. Note that if 
a user prints out a document, he has paid 
a royalty on its transmission. It is 
paid~' just as a paperback bought at 
the drugstore has had its royalty paid 
up. And if a copyright holder cannot be 
satisfied with this arrangement-- even 
knowing no other is possible-- he had 
better withhold his stuff from this sys­
tem. 
Note also that he who makes a paper 
copy is losing all dynamic link connec­
tions, and is left with the inert, non­
interactive copy. And while sane of you 
may have trouble believing it, that will 
be a considerable deprivation in the 
world we are talking about. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 47 ---

WHAT'S A PUBLISHER? 
Traditionally, an author is someone 
who creates a work, whether or not on his 
own initiative. A publisher is a busi­
nessman or business firm that takes the 
business initiatives, deciding to publish 
the work, fronting the money to print, 
warehouse, and advertise. He, or it, also assumes certain legal risks from 
which he usually guards the author. The publisher may also encourage and cajole 
the author, buck him up, advance him 
money for work unfinished, and finally erect a plaque to his memory on the Hotel 
Chelsea. 
Ownership and copyright are split 
between author and publisher according to their own negotiated private arrangement. 
If compound united hypertext is the printing press of the future, the pub­lisher of the future can do all these things in exactly the same way. Except 
now there is no "printing and warehous­
ing," but a certain required minimum disk rental. Thus a "publisher" is someone 
who pays for the rapid accessibility of materials and benefits from their use 
along with the author. ON-LINE BOOKS AND MAGAZINES 
Just the fact that things are on 
an electronic system does not threaten 
their integrity; indeed, every unit fully retains its integrity in the 
present system. 
A book is still a comparatively 
large unit of writing or anthology, 
written and published by specific peo­pel on specific dates. 
A magazine ~ journal is still a collection of shorter pieces (perhaps 
windowing from elsewhere) which is regularly edited by the same person or people, and regularly published at a specific time. 
Magazines and journals will have 
great importance in such a publishing 
system (as they do in the paper world) 
because they will furnish stabilized 
views of the world, offering a predic­table kind of material, and bringing in, evaluating, and now windowing, 
ideas from all over. 
LITERARY 2/'12. MACHINES 

--- Page 48 ---

DIRECTORIES AND CATEGORIE S 
Two system directories , main­
tained by the system itself, are anti­
cipated: author and title, no more. 
Other directories would essen­
tially involve categorization, like 
the Dewey Decimal and Library of Con­
gress catalog systems, or the Yellow 
Pages of the phone book. 
There is nothing wrong with cate­
gorization. It is, however, by its 
nature transient: category systems 
have a half-life, and categorizations 
begin to look fairly stupid after a 
few years. (Indeed, simple categori­
zations of computer articles in compu­
ter bibliographies of ten years ago 
have alr~ady begun to look stupid.) 
The army designation of "Pong Balls, 
Ping" has a certain m1iversal charac­
ter to it. 
All category-systems make some 
sense, few stay good for long. (How­
ever, the Yellow Pages categories are 
an interesting exception, being dread­
ful to begin with, and, though sup­
posedly updated from time to time, do 
not seem to improve. Try to find from 
them the nearest place to make paper 
copies.) 
What is the solution for our sys­
tem? Keep categorizing directories 
~ of ~ system level. This is user 
LITERARY business; let them handle it and col­
lect royalties . 
Provision will exist for anyone 
to publish his own document lists, 
categorized in any way he imagines, 
and have users bounce through them in 
search of whatever they think they may 
find. 
PARTIAL PUBLICATION 
A whole document need not be pub­
lished. That is, someone may publish 
what to him is only part of a document, 
keeping the rest private. Very well: 
now his private document is windowing 
into the materials he has published as 
part of the "real11 larger document that 
still appears on his screen. 
Historical backtrack alts, etc., 
may also be held privately in a common 
pool with documents which have entered 
the "published" world. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 49 ---

USE WITH OTHER DATA STORES 
There are many purveyors of les­
ser services who say, in effect, "Ha 
ha, we've got the copyrighted mater­
ial , you can go hang. " 
Maybe yes, maybe no. Suppose 
that Company Y has some key legal doc­
ument on line--say, the Napoleonic 
Code-- and you need to make marginal 
notes; they offer no such facility. 
Well then! Connect to ours and 
theirs at the same time. Write your 
marginal notes on our system, with the 
linking information; then your front 
end can call up the Controlled Docu­
ment and show it with the notes you've 
stored on our system. 
In the general case, then, we can 
marry our data structures and linking 
facility even to the dog-in-the-manger 
on-line material whose purveyours do 
not wish to cooperate. 
LITERARY Or suppose you have private ma­
terial you do not wish to expose 
through communication lines, even in 
encrypted form. Nevertheless, the 
system we are discussing can help you 
with detailed linkages, backtracks, 
etc., even though it runs on a public 
system: for you may use its indexing 
facilities to control your data, sight 
unseen. Your data stays home, blind 
indexing is stored on the net under 
your control-- with the contents it 
controls wholly unknowable to any par­
ties but you. 
ru-t 
1..,1NK.¢e 
~ 1,~ron\(:~ c.. 
F•t.H(G-
MACHINES 

--- Page 50 ---

LITERARY VIDEODISC CONNECTIONS 
There has been a great deal of 
whoop-te-do recently about videodiscs , 
the storage devices that hold one or 
more hours of TV on a platter. Sever­
al of these are now available and in­
compatible. Some of them offer freeze­
frame and random frame addressability. 
Very well: they are a fast image play­
out that can be hooked up to our in­
dexing for complex purposes. 
(The widely-touted notion that 
videodiscs will be useful for text li­
braries seems a little silly, since 
they make it possible to access only 
what you actually have right there, 
while a hypertext network could allow 
immediate access to everything on it; 
a vast difference.) 
( (Another use of the term "video­
disc," causing total confusion, is its 
use to refer to certain high-density 
write-once digital disks under devel­
opment by Phillips. we are often 
asked whether these "videodiscs" will 
be useful for our system, and the an­
s'11i'er is yes, but they aren't video­
discs.)) 
MACHINES 

--- Page 51 ---

2.a DISTRIBUTION AND NETWORKING 
It might be possible to do all this out of one feeder machine, but there are disadvantages. 
In the previous sections of this chapter we have discussed virtuality, in particular, the conceptual struc­ture of the proposed system. So far, the service might be provided from a single computer, or "centralized data bank." We have more or less assumed a single-processor version of this sys­tem, one which easily treats all docu­:nents and their versions as: an inter­connected whole because they are stored in the same place. 
However, there are fairly delin­ite limits on what one machine can hold and the number of users it can crovtde services to. For the ser­vices described here to be seriously expanded to large numbers, it will be necessary to •network• the service through multiple computers distribu­ted throughout the nation, and/or the world. 
The system should be able to grow without size limit, containing in the body of available writings whatever anyone has stored from any place on the network. 
So ..a turn to the idea of storing the materials on a network of compu­ters. But we do not want the virtual­ity to change. A user should get any­thing he asks for an instant after the request, even if it comes from tar away- ~owever widely scattered its 
LITERARY parts ~ay be in their storage ership, even if some parts of from one faraway place, other from other faraway places. and own­it come parts 
All of storage near and far be­comes a united whole- what is now called a "distributed data base." Ac­tual locations are essentially invisi­ble to the user: or, in that tradi­tional phrase, "You don't care where it's stored." The documents and their links unite into what is essentially a swirling complex of equi-accessible unity, a single great universal text and data grid, or, as we call it, a "docuverse . " 
MACHINES 

--- Page 52 ---

In principle it is possible to extend this system of storage and 
publication to a whole network of feeder computers. 
A user at any location may store 
what he or she wishes; links may be 
created by anyone, from anywhere, to 
bring a document (or part of one) to 
the inquiring user. Given today's 
network technologies, this is not 
really difficult; this part of the 
system-- the immediate delivery of 
anything from within a large arbitrary 
network of computers-- is not far­
fetched. From a nuts-and-bolts point 
of view the material is more effi­
ciently dispersed among holding sta­
tions united by a communication net­
work. This is essentially state of 
the art. 
LITERARY From the software point of view 
needing to Wlite the documents 
into a single, instantly-available 
docuverse-- a number of challenges 
sxist. 
One is that multiple copies of 
each document must be distributed a­
bout the network for safety-- in a 
shifting distribution tha.t keeps up 
with demand and other needs. Another 
i• that these copies- even with 
their historical-trace backpacks-­
:nust be updated in place. And a 
change mu•t scnehow be known through­
out the n•~rk the instant it hap­
pens. with new things at once assim­
ilated to the great corpus. 
Mvt.11 N IH)E. !:)l,:;n( ,-s~,,~ 
l,tT'fi f~q Ctf ~ 
MACHINES 

--- Page 53 ---

The stored literary contents of all the computers on the network may be continually united into a single, accessible whole. 
Moreover, while copies of all infoJ:mation can.not be stored in eac.n location, enough of a trace or string 
must be in each place to pull in 
whatever is needed from wherever it is-a •ripcord• to unleash any se­lected document. 
(Schemes for all these needs exist, having been worked out within our proprietary data-structure frame­work.) 
LITERARY m=TWOR!C CONNECTIONS 
Essentially tha network will 
have two connection speeds: the fast lin•• that unit• the station•, and the slow linka.to uaera. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 54 ---

For connection to users, the con­
templated network should of course 
hook up by whatever channels are most 
convenient for them: directly (at 
Stations), and via camnunication links 
such as Telenet• and telephone. It 
should also tie to other digital net­
works, either in the amateur market 
(such as The Source and Pc-let), or the 
professional world (such as ARP.Anet). 
It is intended that the contemplated 
ser1ice will hook up to all ethical 
vendors who wish to offer gateway ser­
vice to our docuverse. 
LITERARY Xanadu 
System 
I I I I 
I direct printin1 tuminal 
' ', ', . ~ .. Jumb .. 
-· CRT 
Sorcerer & 
other 
PERSONAL 
COMPUTERS 
A.M.4TEUR A.ND 
PERSONA.L NETFORJC.S 
PROFESSIONAL A.ND 
SPECJA.L NETITORKS; DA.TA. BA.NICS 
For the connections between sta­
tions, tha mechanics of computer net­
working are fairly straightforward, 
and we need not go into them here. 
The so-called "packet" approach (now 
being standardized under the name X.251 
allows direct commercial hookup via 
Telenet. More high-budget and high­
flying approaches can use direct sat­
ellite links between stations, which 
are available and feasible now-. 
•aov big will the total storage 
be?" people aak. The an5"'er is, as 
~ as people will~ for. Everj= 
tlwigstored ha~7iavemoney behind 
it. The system will grow as long as 
paying demand increases- which should 
be for a considerable period. No mat­
ter how big it grows, you will be able 
to get anything in it very quickly-­
as long a• disks are added to the sys­
tem. 
V P~Pe~ 
eXP(I1{.r, &il 
--➔ 
MACHINES 

--- Page 55 ---

Example: 
A scholar writes a new interpreta­
tion of ancient Greek society, with num­
erous quotations from the writings of 
those times. Each quotation is a window, 
allowing the reader to step through and 
read the original. 
ANY SUBSET, SUBSTRUCTURE OR 
GROUPING 
WINDOWING INTO THE PRIOR 
LITERATURE-previous public contents 
of entire network 
LITERARY MACHINES 

--- Page 56 ---

THE GREAT HOPE AND CONJECTURE 
OF INSTANT UNIFICATION 
Perhaps the most important thing, 
and certainly the hardest part to believe, 
is that everything on such a network can 
come immediately, even as it grows to tre­
mendous size. 
First, let's be clear what we mean 
by "immediately." we mean very quickly, 
even though there will be variations. If 
you telephone San Francisco from Chicago, 
you get through "immediately"-- that is, 
within perhaps three to fifteen seconds, 
with an off chance of having to wait 
thirty. We're talking about figures like 
that.* 
In any case, for comparatively lo­
cal service (on-planet or nearby), we 
may look forward to "instant" retrieval 
of whatever is asked for. This means 
essentially that all documents become a 
single instantaneous whole. This in turn means that compound 
documents of any kind become effectively 
as accessible as simple ones. And we may 
read and write accordingly. 
~ Now, as human habitation grows be­
yound the planet and speed-of-light con­
siderations become significant, obviously 
performance will degrade. For off-planet 
users (or earthbound users calling an 
off-planet station), the usual perform­
ance figure must be added to the trans-mission time. Obviously, too, if inter­
stellar travel is ever achieved, trans­
mission delays will degrade response time 
to months and years. (However, some 
thought has been given to this problem in 
the overall design: see "Tumbling through 
the Docuverse, " Chapter 4. ) 
LITERARY Z/ry MACHINES 

--- Page 57 ---

2•9 VttAL 1S1CJtS 
Thus we have the framework of a complete, radically different way 
of handling information. 
OSER PRIVACY: A VITAL ISSUE 
The net-work will not, may not 
monitor who reads what or who writes 
what in private documents. This is 
vital. It is not easy to guarantee 
and impossible to make fully automat­
ic. This important problem will be 
taken up later, in Chapters Three. 
A PRINTING PRESS 
We consider that this system may 
best be considered as a "printing 
press" of the future. 
LITERARY FREEDOM OF THE PRESS 
If this system is a printing 
press, we can brook no greater res­
triction on its functions than on con­
ventional printing. Freedom of the 
press has been challenged by tyrants 
and scoundrels since Gutenberg. It 
will happen again, and worse, on this 
new playing-field. We must be ready. 
LEGAL GOOD BEHAVIOR 
Plainly, the system must live 
within the law. However, what the law 
is may often not be clear. Grey areas 
(for the USA) involve pornography, li-
bel, and "national security" (often 
meaning matters embarrassing to a pol­
itical administration). 
There is no thinking out all 
these eventualities. But this is a 
libertarian system: restrict it, and 
all will lose. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 58 ---

Numerous issues of persona l freedom are conspicuously present. 
JOHN DOE PUBLICATION 
Normally publication will be by 
stable individuals and companies with 
known residence or place of business. 
Still, there is no reason that anony­
mous publication by walk-in and tran­
sient users of the system should not 
be allowed. 
PEREMPTORY CHALLENGE 
OF J'OHN DOE PUBLICATION 
However, John Doe publication is 
more sensitive to challenge, since the 
John Does do not hang around to defend 
their acts. 
Hence peremptory challenges of 
John Doe publications must carry 
'-"ieight. 
Consider libelous or uncomplimen ­
tary John Doe graffiti defaming speci­
fic individuals. If John Doe is not 
available, the affected individual 
should be able to effect removal of 
the materials by peremptory challenge. 
LITERARY CHALLENGE OF DEFENDED MATERIALS 
Ho'-"iever, where materials are pub­
lished by stable and accountable indi­
viduals or firms, peremptory challenge 
no longer holds water, and removal 
must be by negotiation or by court 
order. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 59 ---

What we call "tuning" the system is the development of simple, fair and well-balanced arrangements and pricing that will balance users' incentives for the flexible and reasonable use of the system. (See "Tuning," Chapter 4.) 
COPYRIGHT VIOIATIONS 
Once materials are outside the 
system and the user's terminal, normal 
copyright law applies. Thus making 
magnetic or paper copies of documents, 
and giving them away or selling them, 
is tortious and illegal, as it would 
be without our system. Enforcement, 
of course, is the victim's problem. 
Since the use of any material on 
the system by windowing is defined as 
fair use, people are much freer to do 
what they like with whatever is avail­
able. 
One fo:cm of copyright violation 
is quite esoteric. That it is fre­
quently mentioned suggests that people 
are reaching rather far for objections. 
It is this: what if someone makes 
~~ of materials published by some­
one else on the system, then re-enters 
them as his own in order to obtain ---------royalties? As long as it went undetected, 
LITERARY this scheme would work. However, the 
violator is exposing himself, if de­
tected to a prima facie case of copy­
right violation. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 60 ---

PLURALISM-- AND NEW UNDERSTANDING 
What is in such a publishing net­
work may be revised by anyone, rein­
terpreted, redesigned. Anyone can pub­
lish a~ version of Thomas Aquinas, 
Ayn Rand, Einstein, or whoever else's 
writings are on the system, attempting 
to reach the true and correct formul­
ations that always seem to elude the 
person ahead of you. And no harm is 
done, no credit lost, to the originals. 
The same applies to explanations. 
Most scientists and philosophers are 
not the ones to clarify their own work. 
The writings of a Niebuhr or a Talcott 
Parsons need to be considerably clari­
fied by other commentators before 
most people can understand them. 
A-."!o...a. ~~, ~"•9t ~--)"fl) 
--~'""'Jut~ 
LITERARY Very well. With the capacity for 
any number of compound windowing docu­
ments, good explainers-- the Asimovs 
of tomorrow-- can take what is already 
there, and add the many clarifications 
that will bring understanding. 
Is this chaos? Not at all. Be­
cause at any one time, you are within 
one specific document, the work of a 
specific author. If this work is win­
dowing to other documents, neverthe­
less you are not "in" the others, but 
viewing them through the present au­
thor's filter. 
MACHINES 

--- Page 61 ---

ETERNAL REVISION 
There is no Final Word. There is 
always a new view, a new idea, a rein­
terpretation. Windowing hypertext of­
fers the possibility that all writings 
(never mind the word "knowledge") 
may be forever revised and reinterpre­
ted by new scholars, summarizers, pop­
ularizers, anthologizers. 
LITERARY MACHINES 