THE HYPERTEXT. Theodor H. Nelson, Vassar Collere,
Poughkeepsie, N.Y,, .5.4.

We are at an historic divide like that created by movable
type. To supplement movable type came such further inven-
tions as the footnote, preface, magazine, bookshelf and edi-
tor. The technology of automatic display, stored-program
computers and bulk information storarce call now for a like
range of inventions and conventions: di splay modes, organizing
arrangements, and academic and professional roles and prac-
tices that will give us the most from these new devices.

This paper proposes a new medium, the hypertext. This is a
generic term for texts (and combinations of texts with other
materials) which, because of their structure, require auto-
matic handling and display devices. The hypertext will typi-
cally be non-linear, branching, and large, with various
options to the user.

The idea of the hynertext is distinct from Information Re-
trieval (snecialiot dissemination and query search), Infur-
mation Display (presentation of data desired in a known con-
text) and Programmed Education (restricted-sequence presenta-
tion and drill.) None of these fits the general case. The

hypertext is suited not just to specialty materials (which

fit on paner nicely), but to give general reference and in-

striction. It may contain a corpus of general and special

materials, with their many interconnections indexed, Arbi-

trary boundaries of subject matter can be ignored. 2 feed sel
sf

may be built out of existing writs ngs, not mechanical heap-
ed but personally assembled, according to considerations of
Showmanship and pedagogy, Like any anthology, the hypertext
may contain interrelated texts and information from diverse
original sources. It may also contain summaries and abstracts
written at different levels, permitting separate entry to
users of different backgrounds, competences and interests, al-
lowing them to pursue such details or overview as they desire,
A hypertext system could provide instant lookup of definitions,
biographies, or explanations. It could have new types of
aphic material (moving or mnemonic), ways to show relations
indexes, footnotes, marginalia), even of browsing or reading
O.key stroboscopic), Discursive, conceptual and general-pur-
pose, it will permit self-education according to interest and
motivation, even exploiting natural curiosity and intellectual
gumption, which so often hinder conventional instruction.

